In this lecture, we want to talk about how
we describe the position of things in the
world. In robotics, this is really, really
important.
For instance, in our robotics problem, we
might want to describe the position of a robot.
We might also want to describe the position
of something that the robot wants to interact
with. For instance, it might want to interact
with my water bottle. So I need to describe
the position of the robot, the position of
the water bottle and I’m also interested
in describing the relative position.
Where is the water bottle with respect to
the robot? And that's clearly something that
the robot would like to know if it wanted
to go and pick up the water bottle.
When it comes to describing the position of
things, we need some kind of frame of reference.
This is a pretty important aspect of describing
the position of things in the world. Here
is a picture of our world. And one of the
things we need to keep in mind of course is
that our world, the surface of our world is
moving. A point on the surface at the earth
– the equator is moving nearly 500 meters
per second in space. The earth itself is moving
at quite a high speed around the sun. And
then our solar system is moving at very high
speed around the centre of the galaxy. And
the galaxy itself is moving at incredible
speed towards the constellation Leo. So, everything
is in motion.
If we're trying to describe where things are,
it's really important that we consider the
frame of reference.
Everything is moving so we just have to put
effectively a stake in the ground and say,
"This is the reference point and we'll decide
all positions with respect to that reference
point". That's exactly what we do. We're going
to put a stake in the ground. For instance,
like this sign post here and say, "This is
the origin. This is the coordinate, zero zero
and we're going to measure all distances from
that.
And we're going to create a coordinate frame.
Effectively two orthogonal axes. An x-axis,
and a y-axis, sorts of things that you learn
at school. And we're going to use those two
distances, the distance along the x-axis, the
distance along the y-axis, in order to describe
the position of an object in two-dimensional
space.
In this lecture, we're going to keep things
simple. We're only going to consider the position
in two dimensions. In the next lecture, I
will kick it up a notch and talk about position
in 3 dimensions.
Now, reference points are entirely arbitrary.
So, let's talk for a moment about the reference
system that we use on our own planet. So,
here we have a depiction of planet earth.
And this is a projection, the earth of course
is a sphere. And to make a rectangular map
like this what we have to do is cut the sphere,
unroll it, stretch it out so that it looks
like a rectangle. And we put a couple of reference
lines on our globe. The most important one,
perhaps the most obvious one, is the equator.
Because the earth is a sphere, we have an
obvious axis which is that which the planet
rotates around. And you may create a plane
orthogonal to this rotational axis that cuts
the sphere into two equal hemispheres, and
we call that line the equator and it shown
here in black. And you can go and visit the
equator when you can stand with your leg one
in the Northern Hemisphere and one in the
Southern Hemisphere.
Now there's another line, which we call the
Prime meridian and it passes orthogonal to
the equator, and it passes through the Greenwich
observatory in London.
This line is completely arbitrary. It doesn't
have to be through the Greenwich observatory
but the convention on our planet is that
we used the Greenwich observatory line as
the Prime meridian, and you can go visit Greenwich
you can put your feet on either side
of the Prime meridian in the West and the
Eastern Hemispheres of the planet.
The distance in the horizontal direction,
we refer to as longitude. And the direction,
the distance in the other direction, we refer
to as latitude. So we have lines of longitude
and lines of latitude that we inscribe onto
the sphere. And those two numbers, longitude
and latitude, are sufficient to describe the
position of any point, any place on the surface
of our planet.
Now, we have this arbitrary line as I've mentioned
before which we called the Prime meridian
which goes through the Greenwich observatory.
If history had been different, we would have
had a different Prime meridian. There was
a proposal for the Prime meridian to go through
the Paris observatory. And if you visit Paris
today, you can see a line referred to as the
Arago line which is where this non-existent
Prime meridian passes through the city of
Paris. And it's named after a French astronomer
and mathematician, Arago, who proposed that
particular Prime meridian.
So, the take home message here is that this
Prime meridian is completely arbitrary. It
is a convention that we've all agreed upon.
It's useful to have this convention and that's
how we describe points on the planet of the
earth.